I'm sure that this is going to resonate
with people this conversation do you
have suggestions for people who might be
feeling that kind of like
I know what you mean when you do
something that you're like your soul
doesn't agree with and it's like I call
it I think what I get is some sort of
existential Horror oh it's just like
yeah it's just like everywhere and it's
like you're going in the wrong direction
of reality or something so if
if people are stuck in that and are
scared
how how do those people try and stop and
switch to going in the right direction
hopefully that made us some semblance of
sense right right and you know what
Michaela I wish there was a
you can imagine that I get asked that
question hundreds of times and I think
we want a simple answer don't we we we
want just one answer that
I I don't think there's one answer
um part of it is to to try to listen to
what you say
to what you're saying and see if it
makes you feel stronger or weaker yeah
like each word is like a stepping stone
through a swamp
you know and and if it's the right word
then you step on it it feels secure and
stable compared to the territory around
it and you test that out and then you
dare to see if that's the way you think
as opposed to that Persona that you're
putting on for public adulation and
protection right that's the temptation
of the actor
so in in the movie Pinocchio when
Pinocchio is trying to stop lying and to
become a real boy he faces two major
Temptations apart from lying one is to
be a victim
and the other is to be an actor it took
me a long time to to figure out why
being an actor was a temptation
but you put your finger on it with your
description
it's to adopt a set of rules that will
well appeal to narcissistic inflation
something like that it's it's and
there's a terrible totalitarian danger
in that
terrible
yeah so yes and and that's my suspicions
are that's what you were reacting to so
viscerally that you were participating
in that and you had your reasons but
um you mentioned something that I think
maybe the three of us could discuss that
would be
would be interesting you know this idea
about all white people being racist
so so I kind of wondered about that as a
psychologist but more broadly because
maybe you could say
well are all people
racist and here's here's what I mean by
that
well we all have an in-group preference
now what that group might be you know it
might be you and the person you love
might be you and your family might be
you and your town it might be you in
your state or your country it might be
you and your race you know that who that
in-group is can vary but we do have
preferences for people and we do have
in-group preferences and the coral area
of that is that we have out group uh
skepticism and maybe fear and maybe
disgust and all of that and
from what I've been able to understand
anthropologically that's more or less a
human Universal you know as as different
peoples have been brought around the
world into global
Community let's say one of the things
that anthropologists have found is that
it's it's almost always the case that
any given tribe of people will use the
word that refers to human beings to
their tribe and some other word to
everyone else
and so it's possible that that's a deep
tendency that we all have to fight
against and I mean there's part of the
reason these ideas are so compelling to
people and able to possess the the
wokeness ideas let's say the user casual
category is that
you know they contain an element of
Truth
you know
people have it in group preference
that can easily be distorted into
something that's that's quite akin to
racism I mean you even see that in
chimpanzees for example they'll go on
grading forays into neighboring
territories and if they outnumber the
males do this if they outnumber
the foreigners that they come across
they will tear them to pieces
so it's yeah yeah that was a stunning
Discovery lovely lovely that
primatologists made Jane Goodall's team
discovered that in the 70s it was a real
shock wow right so they're trying to
find all the nice chimps yeah well
they're like oh they just rip each other
down there to shreds whoa okay yeah
exactly well no one had had any inkling
previous to that that that human
tendency for for war you know broadly
speaking was so deep that it was even
shared by our you know closest animal
uh
relative so this is very deep so you
know the idea that racism and in group
preference all of that is something that
human beings struggle with is true and
then you say well you know you twist out
of it you say well that's particularly
true of white people because they hold
the power
it's like well you know it's an
interesting proposition
but the question is well if it's true
exactly how it's How is it true and
what's its limits and you know how does
that play out in the case of other races
or groups Asians for example right
um
um and what are the dangers of putting
the idea that way like and what makes
you so sure that that's also not true of
your group and how does power play into
that like these are all these are all
genuine questions that we should be
asking ourselves instead of
like hammering home the idea that we
have the answer to this it's like well
I'll you know you you you you said you
know you you got elevated as a black
woman in this well it's very difficult
to see that to not see that as an
exacerbation of your in-group preference
and then an exaggeration of that
implicit or explicit racism on your part
and I think that's part of what you were
rebelling against yes yes yes yes yes
and and you know what the questions that
you were just asking before those are
the exact questions that I had just
simple questions
um and it started to signal again that
something wasn't right here that I
couldn't even just ask the simplest
questions or at least felt that I
couldn't I could have but I was much
more scared of the consequences of
asking the questions than leading with
the Curiosity of getting some kind of
answer right
um
and in my letter Michaela you read this
part out earlier about
the disempowerment of black people
that's how I started to feel extremely
disempowered you know even when people
would say things like yeah it's because
white people have all the power
according to who and in what context are
we talking about
the world you are which ones right I had
I had an experience like that
um it's not exactly like that it was
like that but for me and I was taking
Sciences
um because I'd switched out of
humanities because there was a lot of
you know I was taking a course on Homer
and it was Homer through the feminist
lens and I was like that's not what I
came that's not what I paid you guys for
so I switched into sciences and about
every couple months somebody would come
in and they'd say okay for all the women
in the room I know you've had you've had
a much harder time getting to where you
are than the men have
and I I was just like are you are you
telling me I'm stupid like what exactly
are you saying here and how dare you
suggest that it was just it was like
insulting and kind of a condescending
way which was the complete opposite of
whatever they were well and maybe it
wasn't the opposite of what they were
trying to do
um but yeah it's condescending and
irritating yeah well it means well think
about what that does in some sense it
makes your generic femininity
and your generic vulnerability
far more important than your individual
particularity
you know and this is what I've been
objecting to with regards to this
group mentality from the beginning it's
it seems to me that it's fundamental
Danger
the fundamental danger is the
devaluation of the of the sacredness of
the individual as the primary category
you replace that by group identity you
have no idea what kind of devil you're
messing with or or maybe you do to some
degree you experienced it a bit because
you messed about with that devil and you
got tempted and 7 000 people told you
you were right it's like imagine you're
a political leader
okay now imagine 30 million people tell
you that you're right and they chant
that in a mob and they do that
everywhere you go if that's what
happened in Germany and then you play to
the crowd
you're that actor you play to the crowd
and you get hungry and hungrier for that
validation
and you train yourself to say anything
the crowd demands no matter how dark
right right right